The Indian independence movement was a series of events during the British Raj, starting with the aim of ending British rule in India on the Indian subcontinent and it ended with India being partitioned and getting Independence in August 1947.[1]

The first nationalistic revolutionary movement for Indian independence emerged from Bengal.[2] It later took root in the newly formed Indian National Congress with prominent moderate leaders seeking the right to appear for Indian Civil Service examinations in British India, as well as more economic rights for natives. The first half of the 20th century saw a more radical approach towards self-rule by the Lal Bal Pal triumvirate, Aurobindo Ghosh and V. O. Chidambaram Pillai.[3]

The last stages of the self-rule struggle from the 1920s was characterized by Congress' adoption of Gandhi's policy of non-violence and civil disobedience. Intellectuals such as Rabindranath Tagore, Subramania Bharati, and Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay spread patriotic awareness. Female leaders like Sarojini Naidu, Pritilata Waddedar, and Kasturba Gandhi promoted the emancipation of Indian women and their participation in the freedom struggle.[3] B. R. Ambedkar championed the cause of the disadvantaged sections of Indian society.[4][3]

Some leaders followed a more violent approach. This became especially popular after the Rowlatt Act, which permitted indefinite detention. The Act sparked protests across India, especially in Punjab Province (British India) where they were violently surpressed in the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. Frustrated by perceived Congress inaction, revolutionaries such as Bhagat Singh, Shivaram Rajguru, Sukhdev Thapar, Chandra Shekhar Azad, and Subhas Chandra Bose resorted to violent means. Bose famously allied himself with the Axis powers and formed the Azad Hind. Meanwhile, Singh, Rajguru, Thapar, and Azad assassinated key British officers, and bombed Government buildings.

The Indian independence movement was in constant ideological evolution. Essentially anti-colonial, it was supplemented by visions of independent, economic development with a secular, democratic, republican, and civil-libertarian political structure. After the 1930s, the movement took on a strong socialist orientation. It culminated in the Indian Independence Act 1947, which ended suzerainty in India and created Pakistan.

India remained a Crown Dominion until 26/01/1950, when the Constitution of India established the Republic of India. Pakistan remained a dominion until 1956 when it adopted its first constitution. In 1971, East Pakistan declared its own independence as Bangladesh.[5]
Early British colonialism in India
Main articles: Colonial India, East India Company, Company rule in India, and British Raj
The first European to reach India was the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama, who reached Calicut in 1498 in search of spice.[6] Just over a century later, the Dutch and English established trading outposts on the Indian subcontinent, with the first English trading post set up at Surat in 1613.[7]

Over the next two centuries, the British[note 1] defeated the Portuguese and Dutch but remained in conflict with the French. The decline of the Mughal Empire in the first half of the eighteenth century allowed the British to establish a foothold in Indian politics.[8] During the Battle of Plassey, the East India Company's Indian Army defeated Siraj ud-Daulah, the Nawab of Bengal, and the Company established itself as a major player in Indian affairs. After the Battle of Buxar of 1764, it gained administrative rights over Bengal, Bihar and the Midnapur part of Odisha.[9]

After the defeat of Tipu Sultan, most of southern India came either under the Company's direct rule, or under its indirect political control as part a princely state in a subsidiary alliance. The Company subsequently seized control of regions ruled by the Maratha Empire, after defeating them in a series of wars. The Punjab was annexed in 1849, after the defeat of the Sikh armies in the First (1845–1846) and Second (1848–49) Anglo-Sikh Wars.[10]